README.md, before:

# ngrx-normalizr

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/michaelkrone/ngrx-normalizr.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/michaelkrone/ngrx-normalizr)
![AOT compatible](https://img.shields.io/badge/aot-compatible-blue.svg)

> Managing [normalized state](https://redux.js.org/docs/recipes/reducers/NormalizingStateShape.html) in [ngrx](https://github.com/ngrx/platform) applications, transparently.


This package provides a set of actions, reducers and selectors for handling normalization and denormalization of state data **transparently**.
*ngrx-normalizr* uses [normalizr](https://github.com/paularmstrong/normalizr) for [normalizing](https://github.com/paularmstrong/normalizr/blob/master/docs/api.md#normalizedata-schema) and [denormalizing](https://github.com/paularmstrong/normalizr/blob/master/docs/api.md#denormalizeinput-schema-entities) data. All normalization and denormalization
is defined by the use of [normalizr schemas](https://github.com/paularmstrong/normalizr/blob/master/docs/api.md#schema), since that's the way normalizr works. This enables selectors to use a transparent and powerful projection of state data.

## Installation
To install this package:
```sh
yarn add ngrx-normalizr
npm i ngrx-normalizr
```

### Peer dependencies
*ngrx-normalizr* [@ngrx-store](https://github.com/ngrx/platform/blob/master/docs/store/README.md) as its peer dependencies, so you need to install them if not present already:

> *ngrx-normalizr* itself does not rely on any [Angular](https://angular.io) feature.

```sh
yarn add @ngrx/store
npm i @ngrx/store
```

## Usage
Also refer to the [Typedoc documentation](https://michaelkrone.github.io/ngrx-normalizr/).
To enable the normalizing reducer to store normalized data, you have to add it to your state. The best place for this might be the root state of your application, but feature states may use their own normalized state as well. Extend your state interface with the `NormalizedState` interface. The`ActionReducerMap` has to implement a reducer which reduces the state to a `NormalizedState`.

```javascript
import { ActionReducerMap } from '@ngrx/store';
import { NormalizedState, normalized } from 'ngrx-normalizr';

export interface State extends NormalizedState {
  /* ... other state properties */
}

export const reducers: ActionReducerMap<State> = {
	normalized,
  /* ... other state reducers */
};
```

If there are no other state properties, it is sufficient to add the *ngrx-normalizr* reducer to your state reducers or simply pass it to `StoreModule.forRoot`.
```javascript
export const reducers: ActionReducerMap<NormalizedState> = { normalized };
```

Now you have a `normalized` state property which will hold the normalized data. Do not worry about the weird name,
you will not have to deal with it.

### Schemas
[Schemas](https://github.com/paularmstrong/normalizr/blob/master/docs/api.md#schema) define the relations of your data.
In order to normalize and denormalize data, normalizr needs to be feed with a schema. In this example, a user might have
an array of pets:
```javascript
import { schema } from 'normalizr';

export class Pet {
	id: string;
	name: string;
	type: 'cat' | 'dog';
}

export class User {
	id: string;
	name: string;
	pets: Pet[];
}

export const petSchema = new schema.Entity('pets');
export const userSchema = new schema.Entity('users', { pets: [petSchema] });
```

## Add, set and remove data
Actions are used to set data in - and remove data from - the normalized store.

### Adding data
To add data and automatically normalize it, *ngrx-normalizr* provides a `AddData` action. This action takes an object with `data` and `schema` as an argument. Entities are identified by their id attribute set in the passed schema.
Existing entities will be overwritten by updated data, new entities will be added to the store. For adding related childs, an `AddChildData` action is provided.

###### Using `AddData` in an effect
```javascript
@Effect()
loadEffect$ = this.actions$
  .ofType(LOAD)
  .switchMap(action => this.http.get('https://example.com/api/user'))
  .mergeMap((data: User[]) => [
    // dispatch to add data to the store
    new AddData<User>({ data, schema }),
    // dispatch to inform feature reducer
    new LoadSuccess(data)
  ])
  .catch(err => Observable.of(new LoadFail(err)));
```

#### Adding child data
Adding a related child data to a parent entity can be done with the `AddChildData` action. Note that for this to work, the relation has to be defined in the schema. The action takes a couple of arguments which need to be given in an object:

* `data`: Array of child entities to add
* `childSchema`The `schema.Entity` of the child entity
* `parentSchema`: The `schema.Entity` of the parent entity
* `parentId`: The id of the entity to add child references to

###### Using `AddChildData` in an effect
```javascript
@Effect()
addPetEffect$ = this.actions$
  .ofType(ADD_PET)
  .switchMap(action => this.http.post('https://example.com/api/pets'))
  .mergeMap((data: Pet[]) => [
    // dispatch to add data to the store
    new AddChildData<Pet>({ data, childSchema, parentSchema, parentId }),
    // dispatch to inform feature reducer
    new AddPetSuccess(data)
  ])
  .catch(err => Observable.of(new LoadFail(err)));
```

### Setting data
The `SetData` action will overwrite all entities for a given schema with the normalized entities of the `data` property of the action constructor argument. This action can
be used for resetting entity state data instead of adding and updating existing entities.

### Removing data
To remove data, *ngrx-normalizr* provides a `RemoveData` action.
This action takes an object with `id`, `schema` and an optional `removeChildren` property as constructor argument. The schema entity with the given id will be removed. If `removeChildren` is a map of the schema key mapped to an object property, all referenced child entities will also be removed from the store. This is handy for 1:1 relations, since only removing the parent entity may leave unused child entities in the store.

###### Using `RemoveData` in an effect
```javascript
@Effect()
removeEffect$ = this.actions$
  .ofType(REMOVE)
  .switchMap((action: Remove) => this.http.delete(`https://example.com/api/user/${action.payload.id}`))
  .mergeMap(result => [
    // dispatch to remove data from the store
    new RemoveData({ id: result.id, schema, removeChildren: { pets: 'pets' } }),
    // dispatch to inform feature reducer
    new RemoveSuccess()
  ])
  .catch(err => Observable.of(new RemoveFail(err)));
```
#### Removing child data
Removing a child entity which is 1:1 related to a parent entity can be done with the `RemoveChildData` action. Note that for this to work, the relation has to be defined in the schema. The action takes a couple of arguments which need to be given in an object:

* `id`: Id of the child entity that should be removed
* `childSchema`The `schema.Entity` of the child entity
* `parentSchema`: The `schema.Entity` of the parent entity
* `parentId`: The id of the entity to remove child references from

###### Using `AddChildData` in an effect
```javascript
@Effect()
removePetEffect$ = this.actions$
  .ofType(REMOVE_PET)
  .switchMap(action => this.http.remove(`https://example.com/api/pets/${action.payload.id}`))
  .mergeMap((data: Pet) => [
    // dispatch to add data to the store
    new RemoveChildData({ id: data.id, childSchema, parentSchema, parentId }),
    // dispatch to inform feature reducer
    new RemovePetSuccess(data)
  ])
  .catch(err => Observable.of(new LoadFail(err)));
```

### Action creators
For convenience, *ngrx-normalizr* provides an `actionCreators` function which will return an object with following schema bound action creators:
* `setData` - `(data: T[]) => SetData<T>`
* `addData` - `(data: T[]) => AddData<T>`
* `addChildData<C>` - `(data: C[], childSchema: schema.Entity, parentId: string) => AddChildData`
* `removeData` - `(id: string, removeChildren?: SchemaMap) => RemoveData`
* `removeChildData` - `(id: string, childSchema: schema.Entity, parentId: string) => RemoveChildData`

Action creators could be exported along whith other feature actions:
```javascript
import { actionCreators } from 'ngrx-normalizr';

const creators = actionCreators<User>(userSchema);
export const setUserData = creators.setData;
export const addUserData = creators.addData;
export const removeUserData = creators.removeData;
```

Using the action creator in an Effect class:

###### Using the `removeUserData` action creator in an effect
```javascript
import { removeUserData } from '../actions';

@Effect()
removeEffect$ = this.actions$
  .ofType(REMOVE)
  .switchMap((action: Remove) => this.http.delete(`https://example.com/api/user/${action.payload.id}`))
  .mergeMap(result => [
    // dispatch to remove data from the store
    removeUserData(id: result.id, { pets: 'pets' }),
    // dispatch to inform feature reducer
    new RemoveSuccess()
  ])
  .catch(err => Observable.of(new RemoveFail(err)));
```

## Query state data
*ngrx-normalizr* provides two simple selectors and two simple projector functions to query the state and project/denormalize the result.

### Creating Schema selectors
To transparently query data from the store from a feature module, selectors are provided by the `createSchemaSelectors` function.
It takes an entity schema to create schema bound selectors:

```javascript
import { createSchemaSelectors } from 'ngrx-normalizr';
import { User } from '../classes/user';

const schemaSelectors = createSchemaSelectors<User>(userSchema);
```

`createSchemaSelectors` will return schema bound selectors (instance of `SchemaSelectors`):
* `getEntities` - ` MemoizedSelector<{}, T[]>` Returns all denormalized entities for the schema
* `getNormalizedEntities` - `MemoizedSelector<any, EntityMap>` Returns all normalized (raw) state entities of every schema (the whole entities state)
* `entitiesProjector` - `(entities: {}, ids?: Array<string>) => T[]` Projector function for denormalizing a the set of normalized entities to an denormalized entity array. If no `ids` are given, all entities will be denormalized.
* `entityProjector` - `(entities: {}, id: string) => T` Projector function for denormalizing a single normalized entity with the given id

You might create several selectors with several schemas, i.e. a *listView* schema, which only denormalizes the data used in the list
view, and a *detailView* schema, to completely denormalize a given entity.

### Using schema selectors
Feature selectors can use the schema bound selectors and projector functions to query entity data from the store. To get all denormalized
entities, you might simply use the `getEntities` selector like this:

```javascript
// store.select(getUsers) will give all denormalized user entities
const getUsers = schemaSelectors.getEntities;
```
Under the hood this does something similar to this:
```javascript
// equivalent alternative
const getUsers = createSelector(
  schemaSelectors.getNormalizedEntities,
  schemaSelectors.entitiesProjector
);

```
The `entitiesProjector` simply takes an object of normalized entity data and applies the denormalization with the bound schema. Optionally an array of id strings can be passed as a second parameter to perform denormalization for the given id's only.

#### Composing schema selectors
To query and denormalize specific data you can use the *@ngrx/store* [`createSelectors`](https://github.com/ngrx/platform/blob/master/docs/store/selectors.md#createselector) function and compose them with the schema bound
selectors:

```javascript
import { createSelector } from '@ngrx/store';

export const getSelectedUserId = createSelector(
  userFeatureSelector,
  user.getSelectedId
);

// store.select(getSelectedUser) will give the denormalized selected user
const getSelectedUser = createSelector(
  schemaSelectors.getNormalizedEntities,
  getSelectedUserId,
  schemaSelectors.entityProjector
);
```
`entityProjector` will simply take an object of denormalized entities and apply the denormalization with the bound schema only for the given id. Note that you might also select data from the denormalized result and providing your own selector:
```javascript
const getSelectedUserWithPetsOnly = createSelector(
  getUsers,
  getSelectedId,
  (entities, id) => entities.find(e => e.id === id && e.pets.length > 0)
);
```

## Meta

Michael Krone – [@DevDig](https://twitter.com/DevDig) – michael.krone@outlook.com and all [CONTRIBUTORS](https://github.com/michaelkrone/ngrx-normalizr/graphs/contributors)

Distributed under the MIT license. See [``LICENSE``](https://github.com/michaelkrone/ngrx-normalizr/blob/master/LICENSE) for more information.

[https://github.com/michaelkrone/ngrx-normalizr](https://github.com/michaelkrone/ngrx-normalizr)

## Contributing

1. Fork it (<https://github.com/michaelkrone/ngrx-normalizr>)
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/fooBar`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -am 'Add some fooBar'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/fooBar`)
5. Create a new [Pull Request](https://github.com/michaelkrone/ngrx-normalizr/compare?expand=1)

Commit message:

docs(README): add npm version doc note

README.md, after:

# ngrx-normalizr

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/michaelkrone/ngrx-normalizr.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/michaelkrone/ngrx-normalizr)
![AOT compatible](https://img.shields.io/badge/aot-compatible-blue.svg)

> Managing [normalized state](https://redux.js.org/docs/recipes/reducers/NormalizingStateShape.html) in [ngrx](https://github.com/ngrx/platform) applications, transparently.

This package provides a set of actions, reducers and selectors for handling normalization and denormalization of state data **transparently**.
*ngrx-normalizr* uses [normalizr](https://github.com/paularmstrong/normalizr) for [normalizing](https://github.com/paularmstrong/normalizr/blob/master/docs/api.md#normalizedata-schema) and [denormalizing](https://github.com/paularmstrong/normalizr/blob/master/docs/api.md#denormalizeinput-schema-entities) data. All normalization and denormalization
is defined by the use of [normalizr schemas](https://github.com/paularmstrong/normalizr/blob/master/docs/api.md#schema), since that's the way normalizr works. This enables selectors to use a transparent and powerful projection of state data.

> Releases will be published from the [`master`](https://github.com/michaelkrone/ngrx-normalizr/tree/master) branch. [Go there](https://github.com/michaelkrone/ngrx-normalizr/tree/master) for documentation that aligns with the npm repo version.

## Installation
To install this package:
```sh
yarn add ngrx-normalizr
npm i ngrx-normalizr
```

### Peer dependencies
*ngrx-normalizr* [@ngrx-store](https://github.com/ngrx/platform/blob/master/docs/store/README.md) as its peer dependencies, so you need to install them if not present already:

> *ngrx-normalizr* itself does not rely on any [Angular](https://angular.io) feature.

```sh
yarn add @ngrx/store
npm i @ngrx/store
```

## Usage
Also refer to the [Typedoc documentation](https://michaelkrone.github.io/ngrx-normalizr/).
To enable the normalizing reducer to store normalized data, you have to add it to your state. The best place for this might be the root state of your application, but feature states may use their own normalized state as well. Extend your state interface with the `NormalizedState` interface. The`ActionReducerMap` has to implement a reducer which reduces the state to a `NormalizedState`.

```javascript
import { ActionReducerMap } from '@ngrx/store';
import { NormalizedState, normalized } from 'ngrx-normalizr';

export interface State extends NormalizedState {
  /* ... other state properties */
}

export const reducers: ActionReducerMap<State> = {
	normalized,
  /* ... other state reducers */
};
```

If there are no other state properties, it is sufficient to add the *ngrx-normalizr* reducer to your state reducers or simply pass it to `StoreModule.forRoot`.
```javascript
export const reducers: ActionReducerMap<NormalizedState> = { normalized };
```

Now you have a `normalized` state property which will hold the normalized data. Do not worry about the weird name,
you will not have to deal with it.

### Schemas
[Schemas](https://github.com/paularmstrong/normalizr/blob/master/docs/api.md#schema) define the relations of your data.
In order to normalize and denormalize data, normalizr needs to be feed with a schema. In this example, a user might have
an array of pets:
```javascript
import { schema } from 'normalizr';

export class Pet {
	id: string;
	name: string;
	type: 'cat' | 'dog';
}

export class User {
	id: string;
	name: string;
	pets: Pet[];
}

export const petSchema = new schema.Entity('pets');
export const userSchema = new schema.Entity('users', { pets: [petSchema] });
```

## Add, set and remove data
Actions are used to set data in - and remove data from - the normalized store.

### Adding data
To add data and automatically normalize it, *ngrx-normalizr* provides a `AddData` action. This action takes an object with `data` and `schema` as an argument. Entities are identified by their id attribute set in the passed schema.
Existing entities will be overwritten by updated data, new entities will be added to the store. For adding related childs, an `AddChildData` action is provided.

###### Using `AddData` in an effect
```javascript
@Effect()
loadEffect$ = this.actions$
  .ofType(LOAD)
  .switchMap(action => this.http.get('https://example.com/api/user'))
  .mergeMap((data: User[]) => [
    // dispatch to add data to the store
    new AddData<User>({ data, schema }),
    // dispatch to inform feature reducer
    new LoadSuccess(data)
  ])
  .catch(err => Observable.of(new LoadFail(err)));
```

#### Adding child data
Adding a related child data to a parent entity can be done with the `AddChildData` action. Note that for this to work, the relation has to be defined in the schema. The action takes a couple of arguments which need to be given in an object:

* `data`: Array of child entities to add
* `childSchema`The `schema.Entity` of the child entity
* `parentSchema`: The `schema.Entity` of the parent entity
* `parentId`: The id of the entity to add child references to

###### Using `AddChildData` in an effect
```javascript
@Effect()
addPetEffect$ = this.actions$
  .ofType(ADD_PET)
  .switchMap(action => this.http.post('https://example.com/api/pets'))
  .mergeMap((data: Pet[]) => [
    // dispatch to add data to the store
    new AddChildData<Pet>({ data, childSchema, parentSchema, parentId }),
    // dispatch to inform feature reducer
    new AddPetSuccess(data)
  ])
  .catch(err => Observable.of(new LoadFail(err)));
```

### Setting data
The `SetData` action will overwrite all entities for a given schema with the normalized entities of the `data` property of the action constructor argument. This action can
be used for resetting entity state data instead of adding and updating existing entities.

### Removing data
To remove data, *ngrx-normalizr* provides a `RemoveData` action.
This action takes an object with `id`, `schema` and an optional `removeChildren` property as constructor argument. The schema entity with the given id will be removed. If `removeChildren` is a map of the schema key mapped to an object property, all referenced child entities will also be removed from the store. This is handy for 1:1 relations, since only removing the parent entity may leave unused child entities in the store.

###### Using `RemoveData` in an effect
```javascript
@Effect()
removeEffect$ = this.actions$
  .ofType(REMOVE)
  .switchMap((action: Remove) => this.http.delete(`https://example.com/api/user/${action.payload.id}`))
  .mergeMap(result => [
    // dispatch to remove data from the store
    new RemoveData({ id: result.id, schema, removeChildren: { pets: 'pets' } }),
    // dispatch to inform feature reducer
    new RemoveSuccess()
  ])
  .catch(err => Observable.of(new RemoveFail(err)));
```
#### Removing child data
Removing a child entity which is 1:1 related to a parent entity can be done with the `RemoveChildData` action. Note that for this to work, the relation has to be defined in the schema. The action takes a couple of arguments which need to be given in an object:

* `id`: Id of the child entity that should be removed
* `childSchema`The `schema.Entity` of the child entity
* `parentSchema`: The `schema.Entity` of the parent entity
* `parentId`: The id of the entity to remove child references from

###### Using `AddChildData` in an effect
```javascript
@Effect()
removePetEffect$ = this.actions$
  .ofType(REMOVE_PET)
  .switchMap(action => this.http.remove(`https://example.com/api/pets/${action.payload.id}`))
  .mergeMap((data: Pet) => [
    // dispatch to add data to the store
    new RemoveChildData({ id: data.id, childSchema, parentSchema, parentId }),
    // dispatch to inform feature reducer
    new RemovePetSuccess(data)
  ])
  .catch(err => Observable.of(new LoadFail(err)));
```

### Action creators
For convenience, *ngrx-normalizr* provides an `actionCreators` function which will return an object with following schema bound action creators:
* `setData` - `(data: T[]) => SetData<T>`
* `addData` - `(data: T[]) => AddData<T>`
* `addChildData<C>` - `(data: C[], childSchema: schema.Entity, parentId: string) => AddChildData`
* `removeData` - `(id: string, removeChildren?: SchemaMap) => RemoveData`
* `removeChildData` - `(id: string, childSchema: schema.Entity, parentId: string) => RemoveChildData`

Action creators could be exported along whith other feature actions:
```javascript
import { actionCreators } from 'ngrx-normalizr';

const creators = actionCreators<User>(userSchema);
export const setUserData = creators.setData;
export const addUserData = creators.addData;
export const removeUserData = creators.removeData;
```

Using the action creator in an Effect class:

###### Using the `removeUserData` action creator in an effect
```javascript
import { removeUserData } from '../actions';

@Effect()
removeEffect$ = this.actions$
  .ofType(REMOVE)
  .switchMap((action: Remove) => this.http.delete(`https://example.com/api/user/${action.payload.id}`))
  .mergeMap(result => [
    // dispatch to remove data from the store
    removeUserData(id: result.id, { pets: 'pets' }),
    // dispatch to inform feature reducer
    new RemoveSuccess()
  ])
  .catch(err => Observable.of(new RemoveFail(err)));
```

## Query state data
*ngrx-normalizr* provides two simple selectors and two simple projector functions to query the state and project/denormalize the result.

### Creating Schema selectors
To transparently query data from the store from a feature module, selectors are provided by the `createSchemaSelectors` function.
It takes an entity schema to create schema bound selectors:

```javascript
import { createSchemaSelectors } from 'ngrx-normalizr';
import { User } from '../classes/user';

const schemaSelectors = createSchemaSelectors<User>(userSchema);
```

`createSchemaSelectors` will return schema bound selectors (instance of `SchemaSelectors`):
* `getEntities` - ` MemoizedSelector<{}, T[]>` Returns all denormalized entities for the schema
* `getNormalizedEntities` - `MemoizedSelector<any, EntityMap>` Returns all normalized (raw) state entities of every schema (the whole entities state)
* `entitiesProjector` - `(entities: {}, ids?: Array<string>) => T[]` Projector function for denormalizing a the set of normalized entities to an denormalized entity array. If no `ids` are given, all entities will be denormalized.
* `entityProjector` - `(entities: {}, id: string) => T` Projector function for denormalizing a single normalized entity with the given id

You might create several selectors with several schemas, i.e. a *listView* schema, which only denormalizes the data used in the list
view, and a *detailView* schema, to completely denormalize a given entity.

### Using schema selectors
Feature selectors can use the schema bound selectors and projector functions to query entity data from the store. To get all denormalized
entities, you might simply use the `getEntities` selector like this:

```javascript
// store.select(getUsers) will give all denormalized user entities
const getUsers = schemaSelectors.getEntities;
```
Under the hood this does something similar to this:
```javascript
// equivalent alternative
const getUsers = createSelector(
  schemaSelectors.getNormalizedEntities,
  schemaSelectors.entitiesProjector
);

```
The `entitiesProjector` simply takes an object of normalized entity data and applies the denormalization with the bound schema. Optionally an array of id strings can be passed as a second parameter to perform denormalization for the given id's only.

#### Composing schema selectors
To query and denormalize specific data you can use the *@ngrx/store* [`createSelectors`](https://github.com/ngrx/platform/blob/master/docs/store/selectors.md#createselector) function and compose them with the schema bound
selectors:

```javascript
import { createSelector } from '@ngrx/store';

export const getSelectedUserId = createSelector(
  userFeatureSelector,
  user.getSelectedId
);

// store.select(getSelectedUser) will give the denormalized selected user
const getSelectedUser = createSelector(
  schemaSelectors.getNormalizedEntities,
  getSelectedUserId,
  schemaSelectors.entityProjector
);
```
`entityProjector` will simply take an object of denormalized entities and apply the denormalization with the bound schema only for the given id. Note that you might also select data from the denormalized result and providing your own selector:
```javascript
const getSelectedUserWithPetsOnly = createSelector(
  getUsers,
  getSelectedId,
  (entities, id) => entities.find(e => e.id === id && e.pets.length > 0)
);
```

## Meta

Michael Krone – [@DevDig](https://twitter.com/DevDig) – michael.krone@outlook.com and all [CONTRIBUTORS](https://github.com/michaelkrone/ngrx-normalizr/graphs/contributors)

Distributed under the MIT license. See [``LICENSE``](https://github.com/michaelkrone/ngrx-normalizr/blob/master/LICENSE) for more information.

[https://github.com/michaelkrone/ngrx-normalizr](https://github.com/michaelkrone/ngrx-normalizr)

## Contributing

1. Fork it (<https://github.com/michaelkrone/ngrx-normalizr>)
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/fooBar`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -am 'Add some fooBar'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/fooBar`)
5. Create a new [Pull Request](https://github.com/michaelkrone/ngrx-normalizr/compare?expand=1)
